[Docs] GNSS-Denied Configuration (#25955)
PX4/PX4-Autopilot: docs/en/config/gnss_denied_environments.md

This section describes the various configuration options, and when they are needed.

## Overview

<!--

Here is want to cover that flight modes provide features for stabilization of altitude, position, velocity and so on.
Some of them require global position while others, require only altitude, or a local position.
Modes that don't require global position can be used without a GNSS or in a GNSS denied environment, but you may still need to configure some default, which typically assume the presence of a GNSS.

However if you don't have a GNSS or you need to be able to fly in GNSS denied environment you can still use the automatic modes in some circumstances, given another source of position.

-->

## Modes that don't require GNSS

- **Manual mode** (no stabilization assistance)
- **Stabilized mode** (attitude stabilization only)
- **Altitude mode** (if you have a reliable barometer/rangefinder)

---

<!-- Below is working information for data mining.
I want to structure so that people know when they need to make these changes, and direct them towards the stuff they need.
-->

## Primary Solution: Configure for GPS-Denied Operations

> **1. Enable arming without GPS:**

Author: Note, you have to do this to arm in a mode that normally requires it. If you won't fly auto you might not do this.

I am waiting on linked PR to find out why you would not set `2` if you have a VIO or other source of position, or `0` if you don't.

[COM_ARM_WO_GPS](../advanced_config/parameter_reference#COM_ARM_WO_GPS)

```
COM_ARM_WO_GPS = 1
```

This allows arming when GPS is unavailable, but PX4 will still check other health conditions.

**2. Configure EKF2 GPS requirements:**

```
EKF2_GPS_CHECK = 0        # Disables GPS quality checks
EKF2_REQ_GPS_H = 0        # No horizontal GPS accuracy required
```

**3. Set appropriate flight mode:**

> For indoor flight without GPS, you must use modes that don’t require position estimation:

Author: Though as above, if you provide the mapping it should work. I think perhaps though we'll separate that option out.

```suggestion
For indoor flight without GPS, you must use modes that don't require a global position estimate:
```

- **Optical flow sensor** + downward rangefinder (PX4Flow, etc.)
- **Motion capture system** (OptiTrack, Vicon)
- **Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO)** (T265, etc.)

With these, you can enable:

```
EKF2_AID_MASK = 2    # Use optical flow
```

## Circuit Breaker Parameters

If you really need to bypass specific checks for testing:

```
CBRK_GPSFAIL = 240024       # Bypass GPS failure check
```

Circuit breakers disable critical safety features. Only use for controlled testing, and **never** set all of them at once without understanding the implications.

## Important Safety Notes

- Pre-arm checks exist to prevent crashes and flyaways
- Indoor flight without position estimation is high-risk even for experienced pilots
- Always test in Stabilized mode first before attempting anything else
- Consider using a simulator (SITL) to practice GPS-denied flight first
- Make sure you have manual override capability at all times

**Recommended approach:** Start with `COM_ARM_WO_GPS = 1` and `EKF2_GPS_CHECK = 0`, fly in Stabilized mode, and only disable additional checks if you have specific reasons and understand the risks.​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​

### To add

> 1. There is also EKF2_GPS_MODE "dead-reckoning mode" in main which allows the GNSS to avoid faulting if there is a velocity source - so more for flying in GPS denied environments, but also allows missions to work.

Reviewer: Im with you on that...

From the PR description, it states:

"Tested in SITL and Hardware"
"Testflight with screwed up GNSS data after reaching 460m, healthy again below 440m"

However, it doesn't actually describe what happened during that testflight or confirm successful operation. It just notes that a flight occurred with corrupted GNSS data at altitude.
So you're right to be cautious - the PR provides minimal test documentation, and there does not appear to be published flight reports demonstrating successful operation in real-world GPS-denied scenarios (aka some logs would be nice).

Suggested approach for docs:

Document it as an advanced feature for handling intermittent GPS loss
Clearly state it requires alternative velocity/position sources (not GPS-only)
Note that testing has been limited - request user feedback/flight reports
Recommend thorough SITL testing before field use
(Maybe) Emphasize this is for GPS dropout scenarios, not pure GPS-denied flight from takeoff

The theoretical design makes sense, but field validation and operational experience are clearly limited. Worth documenting the feature while being honest about the maturity level.

   Docs are getting final review https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/pull/25796.
2. YOu can fly the auto modes, at least for MC, if you have a local position and have mapped it to the global position https://docs.px4.io/main/en/ros/external_position_estimation#enabling-auto-modes-with-a-local-position

> I'm sure you know all of that. THis is mostly notes for me.

Author: My understanding is that you might just enable EKF2_GPS_MODE in dead reckoning when you have a GPS, to fly around as long as you want without faulting. The point though is that this is for when have a GPS but want to ignore it if it disappears, not so much for indoor/VIO use.

Reviewer: My view on this is that it's primarily for outdoor flight with intermittent GPS, not indoor/VIO-only operations. But there's an important caveat from the PR description:

> "allows the GNSS to avoid faulting **if there is a velocity source**"

So dead-reckoning mode isn't just "ignore GPS when it disappears and keep flying" - it's "gracefully transition to other sensors when GPS fails, without resetting."

## More Precisely:

**Dead-reckoning mode is for:**
- Flying with GPS in areas where it **might degrade or dropout temporarily** (urban canyons, tree cover, near structures)
- Requires **another velocity/position source** (optical flow, VIO, airspeed for FW) to bridge the GPS gaps
- Prevents EKF resets and jumps when GPS comes back online
- Maintains smooth mission execution through GPS-denied sections

**It's NOT for:**
- Pure GPS-only outdoor flight in open sky (use Automatic mode - simpler and more robust)
- Pure indoor/GPS-denied with VIO only (you'd use `EKF2_GPS_MODE = 0` to disable GPS entirely)

## The Use Case:

Think of a delivery drone mission: takeoff (GPS) → fly under bridge (GPS dropout) → continue to destination (GPS back). Dead-reckoning mode + optical flow lets you complete that mission without failsafe or EKF reset jumps.

**Without the secondary velocity source**, dead-reckoning mode would just accumulate drift when GPS fails - not very useful.

So your understanding is directionally correct, but the feature assumes you have **redundant sensors**, not GPS alone.

Author: Thanks. I think perhaps we need to present these as three "modes" of different GPS levels. I'll try that first but we might have to split the use cases a bit.

> Are behaviours/setups differing for FW vs MC?

Author: ?

Are there any other things we need to think about for the GPS jamming flight case vs the indoor case?
